that thing cost a quarter of
a trillion dollars and it's just
poof everyone's always really surprised
to hear that i didn't watch a lot of
sci-fi growing up i was like how did you
become an astrophysicist if you weren't
inspired by
sci-fi but let's be honest anything
space can make
is way cooler than anything that scifi
has ever made i feel like the comments
section is going to take that comment
pretty hard but i stand by it
so i've seen a lot of recent sci-fi but
i've missed out on a lot of the classics
including star trek which i reacted to
last time
and contact which came out in 1997 and
i'll be watching and reacting to you
today the premise is that jody foster
works for seti the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence and
detects a radio signal from space that
they think is from other intelligent
life
it's based on carl sagan's book of the
same name so i have really high hopes
for this one of my colleagues have told
me they really enjoyed it and it
inspired them
as kids i'm quite excited so here it is
my reaction to the film
contact and of course for all of those
of you who need warning
there'll be spoilers ahead
[Music]
it is so good to see
like i mean it's a spectacular site
anyway right it's this huge dish that's
like 300 meters across in
puerto rico in the usa it's a radio
telescope you know it helps us detect
emission from hydrogen and shows us
where the gases and galaxies it helps to
detect things like pulsars but it's good
to see it because it recently
collapsed back in at the end of 2020
um and that was a really sad sight to
see it was a massive blow to the
scientific community and the community
in puerto rico too
[Applause]
[Music]
so i was all ready to be like this is
fairly realistic
in terms of what a night observing would
look like you know you've got the
darkened room you've got the computer
telling you what coordinates
that you're looking at you've got
headphones on listening to music but
she's just
unplugged a headphones in the machine
and i think that she's been
listening to signals from the telescopes
which you know radio receivers they pick
up radio waves
yes but radio waves are light waves not
sound waves i know that can be a bit
confusing because we talk about like
listening
to the radio and like talking over
radios but the way those radios work
is that your voice and the sound wave is
actually encoded
on the light wave on the radio wave
which is then sent out and then it's
received on the other end and then
decoded and then put out as a sound
again
what they're detecting here is actually
light from space
at radio wavelengths so not
sound they're detecting light you could
technically turn like the detection like
every time like a photon hit the
detector
it would would make a sound or something
but like you wouldn't do that in real
time they're detecting
light here not sound must have been a
star quick
i think it's great that you listen most
people don't do that anymore
no one ever did it mate when did you
know you wanted to be an astronomer
well when i uh when i was about eight
years old i um
i was watching the sunset i asked my dad
what's that bright star over there and
he said
they said that it wasn't really a star
at all it was actually that's not a star
that's a plane
a whole planet called venus that's a
planet of venus
i'm actually getting like a little bit
emotional watching this because that is
very similar to
my story of like how i
ended up knowing that i wanted to become
an astronomer you know um i was maybe 10
years old and i remember stargazing with
my parents and some family
and i remember asking what's that red
star there like why is it red
and i was pointing at beetlejuice in
orion and
none of my family knew and i remember
being like how do you not know this how
do my parents not know the answer to
something right and i had to go find out
myself and i was
amazed when i found out that it was
because it was beetlejuice and it was
hundreds of times
bigger and much cooler than the sun i
remember my mind just being
blown and from then on i just wanted to
find out as much as i possibly could
about space and i guess that's what led
me to becoming like an astronomer an
astrophysicist
today right like i kind of actually wish
that i had seen this film as a kid you
know around me like 13 years old when
you're in that sort of awkward teenage
phase i think it really would have given
me like
such a boost and such an inspiration
that was like dr alloway that would have
been incredible
and i can see now why so many of my
colleagues were inspired by this film
as well and i'm sure people around the
world will be like in generations to
come
this is a unique time in our history in
the history of any civilization
it's the moment of the acquisition of
technology that's the moment where
contact becomes possible
the very large array in new mexico is
the key
to our chances for success with its 27
linked radio telescopes
we can search more accurately than any
other conventional facility
that's not technically true
i don't think because i'm pretty sure
that
the even though like the vla has these
like 27 different
antenna that make it up and that you can
move around it
still has a smaller collecting area than
arecibo this giant you know 300 meter
wide
dish anything becky will help me out
here and correct me if i'm wrong i'll
let you know how much bigger it is
if the vla has a smaller collecting area
that means that it can't detect as
faint signals as the rsc bow can so they
probably would have been better just
sticking with our sigo
all right so i'll admit the vlad does
look better on film probably than our
receiver which is probably why they went
for it
also for those of you who are confused
as to why she is
observing or listening if she has to uh
during the day when you know astronomy
is something you do at night radio
astronomy you can do during the day
because the sun doesn't give off a lot
of radial light so it doesn't really
interfere
with any of the signals that you're
receiving from further afield in space
as long as you don't point your big
telescope dish which
eventually acts like a magnifying glass
directly at the sun
then you're good to go uh these are
government-owned telescopes they can
lease them to whomever they want and
they don't want the high priestess of
the desert using them anymore
what staring at static on tv for hours
at a time listening to washing machines
did you really think these stories
wouldn't get i was looking for patterns
in the chaos come on it doesn't matter
anymore
we're a joke to them so it is really
difficult to get
telescope time like it's massively
oversubscribed right and there's a panel
of expert astronomers that essentially
read through the proposals that
everyone's put together and it's
supposed to be done on scientific merit
alone
and it's done anonymously to avoid
that kind of situation it's also worth
stating that seti funds some
incredible incredible research that's
very worthwhile and
definitely not belittled by the
scientific community you know they do
everything
from planet habitability studies to
studying the first stars and planets
that formed but also searching for
strange radio signals
from space with the breakthrough listen
project in berkeley california
talk to me guys partially polarized set
of moving pulses amplitude modulated
we're locked systems checkout signal
across the board what's the frequency
4.46
23 gigahertz
hydrogen times pi told you
hydrogen times pi what wait even i can't
keep up with all the bloody jargon
that's flying around here what did she
actually say though
what was the freak across the board
what's the frequency four point forty
six twenty three zero four point four
ish hydrogen times hydrogen times pi
yeah so i think she's talking about um
the hydrogen
21 centimeter line here so the hydrogen
21 centimeter line is this prolific
emission line so hydrogen gas all around
the universe
gives out this very specific wavelength
or frequency of light the wavelength is
centimeters i only know the wavelength i
actually don't know the frequency of the
21 centimeter
emission line um let me just look that
up quickly because then i think what
she's talking about
is that if they've multiplied that
frequency by pi it would show that it's
like not a natural thing it would show
that it's
actually like something that's
intelligent life so
yeah the drawing center meter line is
1420 megahertz if you times that by pi
which is roughly three ish you're going
to get something around 4.4 so yeah
they've multiplied
the 21 centimeter hydrogen emission line
that is like a naturally occurring
phenomenon that
everyone who you know has technology
that would allow them to detect the
signal would have also detected the 21
centimeter line
and so timing it by pi shows them that
it's probably not
natural in origin and pull up the star
file on vega
it doesn't make any sense the system is
too young
so i can't have a planetary millionaire
this totally would happen like vega is
one of the most studied stars ever
because it's one of the brightest stars
in the northern hemisphere you can
actually see it
right now if you're in the northern
hemisphere it's up really early morning
just before sunrise towards the east
like just to the right of cassiopeia it
makes
uh one of the sort of vertices of the
summer triangle as well which you can
pick out even if there's loads of light
pollution because there's some of the
brightest stars
in the night sky in the northern
hemisphere at least
whatever the signal is we better do
something soon vegas gonna set
that position is confirmed we've got
four six two three gigahertz so
this has to be set in the northern
hemisphere
summer otherwise you would never be able
to hand over
to csiro in australia to see this
because they wouldn't have
risen above the horizon in the southern
hemisphere summer when it's pointing the
wrong way
to see stars that tend to be in the
northern hemisphere
so sometime between let's say
may and september i guess this is set
just from stars you can tell
the rumors are flying the implications
extraordinary
this morning's detection of an
unidentified radio source from deep
space
can neither be confirmed nor deny so
you wouldn't like this wouldn't happen
right you wouldn't detect the signal
the previous night and then that morning
i have the world's media descend
on the vla wondering what on earth has
happened right you wouldn't announce it
to the world that quick you would go
through
every other single possible explanation
do so
much rigorous science on it to check
before
you then wrote up your results in a
paper and that paper was peer-reviewed
by another astronomer and then it was
finally published
in an academic paper and announced to
the world right that would be
the stages that you'd go through because
you wouldn't want to announce it and
and you not be right and someone else
just point out that it's something
that's already known and then
you know you look a little bit stupid
that process can take
years though right and probably in that
time it would become the worst kept
secret in the astronomy community right
like the
you know b modes in the bicep data or
the optical counterpart for the lego
gravitational waves but we'd all stay
tight
very tight-lipped about it because you
know the last thing you would want is to
announce it too early it'd not actually
be what you've claimed it to be
because as she said earlier if we go
public with this we're wrong that's it
it's it's over
we're cooked to better explain to you
the events of the last 48 hours
i'm turning you over to the leader of
the scientific team that made this
remarkable discovery
dr david drumlin special science advisor
to the president
what he took credit
for for discovery you're freaking
kidding me he's an absolute
especially because he was the one that
like cut their funding from arecibo
in the first place oh that's made me so
angry
like i dread to think how many times
that this has actually happened like in
real life in the scientific
you know history of the world like that
someone more
senior has took credit for a discovery
that a more junior person
made like it massively reminds me of
joss and belle burnell who discovered
pulsars
from strange radio signals radio data
telescopes right
but it was her phd supervisor anthony
hewish
that won the nobel prize for the
discovery and she didn't
[Music]
well i saw the thing coming out of the
sky
i was just thinking about how that would
be a nightmare if that happened today
because
everyone would bring like phones with
them and the radio
interference from those phones would be
crazy you wouldn't be able to do
any astronomy that's why so many radio
telescopes have
big sort of like exclusion zones that
say like no phones you know if you go
visit jodrell bank in manchester you
have to turn off your phone and put it
on airplane mode because we'll be tied
to you if you interfere
with any of their observations
[Applause]
i hate how this film seems to be like
pitting science against religion like
such a
massively overused trope like yes some
scientists are atheists but
there are some that are also very
religious and have faith as well like
the two things aren't
mutually exclusive right and if there's
anyone out there who wants to be a
scientist but thinks they can't because
they're religious
like that's ridiculous please continue
becoming
a scientist right like and don't think
that like faith would ever be
belittled by the scientific community
either like you know i'm an atheist
myself but i have
so much respect for those who have faith
and for their
religious beliefs it brings people so
much hope and happiness like why would
you want to
take that away from people you know just
i just don't need it for myself that's
all
and by doing this you're willing to give
your life you're willing to die for it
why
from as long as i can remember i've been
searching for
something some reason why we're here
what are you doing so i think there's
this weird misconception that
scientists are like properly wedded to
their work and work is all they do and
that's their entire
life but like if someone said to me like
you could finally find out what's inside
a black hole but there's a
90 chance you die i'd be like no thanks
i'm good i like my life outside of work
that's not all the things that i've got
going for myself i'm fine
and i promise i will do my best to
represent my nation
my planet and my god on this historic
journey i thank you from the bottom of
my heart
of course they picked that guy
drumlin or gremlin or whatever his name
is oh my god i'm so mad
the guy that has just been a hindrance
to the entire project
this whole time and who even cut that
funding and then took credit for the
original discovery oh i'm so angry
i was mad at him but i didn't want him
to die oh my
that thing cost a quarter of a trillion
dollars
and it's just poof i must have had him
where are you
the russian government was uh kind
enough to give me accommodations on mir
you're living on a space station so
mia is yeah the russian space station
right now operated i think through the
late
80s early 90s editing back here correct
me but they did have some european
collaborations
in that time as well so for example
helen sharman who was the first
briton into space went to
the mia space station i think in the
early 90s
it's a star i must have
gone through a wormhole they went with
wormhole
okay fine it's something that connects
like two points
in space time now it's completely hype
that's cool but it is technically like a
valid solution to
einstein's equation so it's like a valid
thing mathematically
at least like his equations of general
relativity which say that like mass
curves space time and that's how we
experience gravity
now a wormhole is not a black hole
and that is something that like
hollywood and films over the years
have always got wrong and it's something
that confuses the public
a lot too like no offense but a wormhole
you know it would be a very gentle
curvature of space-time it's something
that you can travel
in and out of as well so it never gets
like so
steep that that be that point of no
return that you'd
have to be traveling faster than the
speed of light to escape
like what you get with a black hole you
think of a wormhole is like
two funnels back to back providing that
little shortcut
through space whereas a black hole is
like a funnel with its bottom
bit of it like pinched into that
singularity and you end up with that
point
of no return and again although black
holes
have been observationally confirmed a
wormhole hasn't they are
completely hypothetical
and yet every scientific instrument
confirms the ipv was out of contact for
only a fraction of a second isn't that
correct doctor
a fraction of a second yes
earth time senator i believe that i'm
really confused here because they're
saying that this pod that she traveled
to this wormhole in right it just fell
straight through the machine and nothing
happened for them it was just that their
instruments like registered this tiny
fraction of a second where they didn't
actually detect anything whereas ellie's
claiming that she was in the pod for
like 18
hours and they're saying it's because of
like time dilation and relativity right
which is this idea that
the faster you're moving the slower time
goes for you so you get in a spaceship
and you could be traveling at some
fraction of the speed of light for a
good number of years it would feel like
four years to you
sort of fly away and come back and when
you got back say 40 years
it passed on the earth as time was
traveling slower for you
but it's like time was traveling faster
for ellie to experience
18 hours when they only experienced a
fraction of a second so that would be
like she was traveling slower
than the people of earth through this
wormhole
which that's why i'm really confused
[Music]
here
oh [ __ ] all
all right final thoughts um i hate
films that don't have closure at the end
like arrival it was like
no one believed her but everybody
believed her and then they didn't make
public the fact that her body cam
recorded 18 hours of static either i
feel like that might have been an
important fact to include in a court
proceeding
and then why didn't they just send
someone else in the machine they spent a
quarter of a trillion dollars on this
twice
because they had to build two of them
and they're just going to leave it
sitting there looking all nice and shiny
and not send anyone else in to
corroborate her story maybe
that would have been a good idea
wouldn't it so all that aside
and the fact that she listens to radio
telescopes is
all of that aside i really really did
enjoy this film you know when you just
switch the astrophysicist's brain
off like it really just tugs at the
heartstrings so much and it really
captures that
wonder that feeling you get when you
look at the night sky and that feeling i
get of just pure joy when you're doing
you know your own research of
astrophysics and astronomy
like this i just really enjoyed that
side of it and i can see now
why so many of my colleagues and i'm
sure so many of you as well were
inspired
by this film so i really enjoyed doing
this again i think i'm definitely gonna
make astrophysicist reacts a series
so if there's any more like classic
sci-fi like tv or film that you think
that i should react to anyway not even
classic new sci-fi as well that i
probably haven't seen because i'm so
busy
chuck it down in the comments and you
never know that might be the next video
in this series and i'll see them before
we get to the bloopers i just want to
thank this week's video sponsor
brilliant brilliant is a website and an
app that was founded on the principle
that you learn
best by doing through active learning
and not just necessarily by watching a
lecture or a video
like this one after this video i thought
you lot might enjoy their course on
waves
and light it goes through what sound
waves are what wave frequencies
and velocities are but also it
specifically has a section on light and
electromagnetic radiation
and how we measure light with telescopes
as well
i figured that would help clear up that
whole listening to radio signals
things that they had in contact so if
that sounds like fun to you and you want
to support me and my channel
then head to brilliant.org forward slash
dr becky that's d-r-b-e-c-k-y
and sign up completely for free plus the
first 200 people that go to that link
which is linked in the video description
below will get 20 off an annual premium
subscription
which is pretty amazing so thank you so
much to brilliant for sponsoring this
video and now
roll those bloopers
arecibo right wait matthew mcconaughey
is in this
how old is matthew mcconaughey seriously
how old is matthew mcconaughey probably
not going to get 51.
what
arroway
i presume is that is that olivander
kind of sounds like an eye on you a long
time doctor that him
it is him i didn't recognize him like
without all the
crazy hair or
that your experience is the result of
being the unwitting star
in the farewell performance of one sr
hadden
a man with the means the motive and the
opportunity to play you and indeed the
rest of us has pawns
in the biggest the most elaborate the
most expensive hoax of all time
oh i swear to god if this turns out to
be a hoax by ollivander i am going to
absolutely
flip my lid all right all right all
right
you